Post about types and programming languages (#6)
dafny-lang/blog: _posts/2023-07-14-types-and-programming-languages.markdown

Dafny can also prove it for our language, out of the box. Well done, that means our language and evaluator make sense together!

{% highlight javascript %}
lemma OneStepEvaluateWellTyped(e: Term)
  requires WellTyped(e) && !IsFinalValue(e)
  ensures GetType(OneStepEvaluate(e)) == GetType(e)
{
  // Amazing: Dafny can prove this soundness property automatically
}
{% endhighlight %}

#### Conclusion

All the code above powers this page, which is why I can guarantee you that you won't be able to find a term that the type checker accepts and that won't result in a final value. Of course, in a real programming language term, you might add some infinite loops, but the soundness property above is not about termination, it's about constant progress, which you also want in embedded systems to ensure they never need reboot.

Now that you know what a type checker is and how to implement one in Dafny, perhaps you will feel much better prepared to model and experiment on your new programming language, like recently the [Cedar team did](https://github.com/cedar-policy/cedar-spec)?

This is the end of the blog post. I hope you enjoyed it!

> <hr>

Reviewer: ```suggestion

---
```

Here is Benjamin Pierce's proof sketch, then translated and verified in Dafny.

1. First, prove `AllTermsInductively <= AllTermsConstructively` by showing that `AllTermsConstructively` satisfies the predicate `InductionCriteria`.
2. Second, for any set `someset` satisfying the induction criteria, for every `i`, we prove by induction that *every set of terms `S(i)` is inside `someset`*.
3. `AllTermsConstructively` being the *union* of all these `S(i)`, it is also contained
in any set satisfying the induction criteria, including `AllTermsInductively` which is the smallest one, so `AllTermsConstructively <= AllTermsInductively`
4. From 1. and 3. we obtain `AllTermsConstructively == AllTermsInductively`.

Let's prove it in Dafny!

## 0. Intermediate sets are cumulative

> First, we want to show that, for every `i <= j`, we have `S(i) <= S(j)` (set inclusion). We do this in two steps: First we show this cumulative effect between two consecutive sets, and then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we want to show that, for every `i <= j`, we have `S(i) <= S(j)` (set inclusion). We do this in two steps: First, we show this cumulative effect between two consecutive sets, and then
```

between any two sets.

> We use the annotation `{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}` which gives Dafny the ability to verify each assertion separatedly, which, in this example, helps the verifier. Yes, [helping the verifier](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging-slow) is something we must occasionally do in Dafny.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use the annotation `{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}` which makes Dafny verify each assertion independently, which, in this example, helps the verifier. Yes, [helping the verifier](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging-slow) is something we must occasionally do in Dafny.
```

> To futher control the situation, we use the annotation `{:induction false}` to ensure Dafny does not try to prove induction hypotheses by itself, so that we have control over the proof. Otherwise, Dafny can both automate the proof a lot (which is great!) and sometimes time out because automation is stuck (which is less great!). I let assertions in the code so that not only Dafny, but you too can understand the proof.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To futher control the situation, we use the annotation `{:induction false}` to ensure Dafny does not try to prove induction hypotheses by itself, which gives us control over the proof. Otherwise, Dafny can both automate the proof a lot (which is great!) and sometimes time out because automation is stuck (which is less great!). I left assertions in the code so that not only Dafny, but you too can understand the proof.
```

{% highlight javascript %}
lemma {:induction false} CannotBeAdd(t: Term)
  requires t in AllTermsConstructively
  ensures !t.Add?
{
  // InductiveAxioms(); // Uncomment if you use AllTermsInductively
}
{% endhighlight %}

which Dafny can verify pretty easily. However, if you put `AllTermsInductively` instead of `AllTermsConstructively`, Dafny would have a hard time figuring out.

- If `x` is in the inductive set, then `Succ(x)` is in the inductive set as well.
Dafny can figure it out by itself using the `AllTermsInductively` definition, but won't be able to do it with `AllTermsConstructively` without a rigorous proof.

{% highlight javascript %}
lemma {:induction false} SuccIsInInductiveSet(t: Term)
  requires t in AllTermsInductively
  ensures Succ(t) in AllTermsInductively
{
  InductiveAxioms();
}
{% endhighlight %}

This could be useful for a rewriter or an optimizer to ensure the elements it writes are in the same set.

Everything said, everything above can be a bit overweight for regular Dafny users.

> In practice, you'd better off writing the inductive predicate explicitly as a function rather than an infinite set with a predicate, so that you get both inductive and constructive axioms that enable you to prove something similar to the two results above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, you're better off writing the inductive predicate explicitly as a function rather than an infinite set with a predicate, so that you get both inductive and constructive axioms that enable you to prove something similar to the two results above.
```

{% highlight javascript %}
predicate IsAdmissible(t: Term) {
  match t {
    case True => true
    case False => true
    case Zero => true
    case Succ(v) => IsAdmissible(v)
    case Pred(v) => IsAdmissible(v)
    case IsZero(v) => IsAdmissible(v)
    case If(c, t, e) => IsAdmissible(c) && IsAdmissible(t) && IsAdmissible(e)
    case _ => false
  }
}
lemma {:induction false} CannotBeAdd2(t: Term)
  requires IsAdmissible(t)
  ensures !t.Add?
{
}
lemma {:induction false} SuccIsInInductiveSet2(t: Term)
  requires IsAdmissible(t)
  ensures IsAdmissible(Succ(t))
{
}
{% endhighlight %}

This above illustrates what Dafny does best: it automates all the hard work under the hood
so that you can focus on what is the most interesting to you, and even better, it ensures you don't need to define `{:axiom}` yourself in this case.

> I hope you give Dafny a try and to see you soon posting [interesting questions on StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/dafny)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I hope you give Dafny a try and to see you soon posting [interesting questions](https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/discussions)!
```
We don't own it, so maybe we shouldn't advertise for them.

Author: Makes sense

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/blog/assets/css/types-and-programming-languages.css">
<img class="clickable" id="img-intro" src="/blog/assets/images/type-and-programming-languages/introimage.png" alt="A type checker on the term If(True, 0, 1)" style="display:block;margin-left:auto;margin-right:auto;width:500px;max-width:95%;"/>
There are many ways even well tested programs can go wrong (see my [previous blog post]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2023-04-19-making-verification-compelling-visual-verification-feedback-for-dafny %}) on how Dafny helps).
Static typing often solves a class of these programming issues entirely by preventing unintended usage of a value.

This blog post takes a deep dive... take a deep breath... on how to write _terms of a programming language_, and both a _type-checker_ and an _evaluator_ on such terms, such that the following _soundness property_ holds:

> 1. [Progress] If a type checker accepts a term, then the evaluator will _not get stuck_ on that term.
> 2. [Preservation] If a term has a type T, then the evaluator will also return a term of type T

We will illustrate this using the infrastructure of the following Blockly workspace.

> If you build a full term and pass it to "Type check", if the type checker succeeds, the block is surrounded with green, otherwise with red.

Reviewer 2: "If you build ... to Type check, if the type checker succeeds" -> "If you build ... to Type check, on success" or something similar, the double if sounds a little weird for me.

> If surrounded with green, then attaching the term to "Evaluate" and clicking on "Evaluate" will always do something, except if the term is a final value. "Evaluate" is also surrounded in red if its term does not type check.

Reviewer 2: "“Evaluate” is also surrounded ... " -> "“Evaluate” is also surrounded ... ". (not sure if the red is in addition to the green, then please ignore this)

}
{% endhighlight %}

#### Conclusion

All the code above powers this page, which is why I can guarantee you that you won't be able to find a term that the type checker accepts and that won't result in a final value. Of course, in a real programming language term, you might add some infinite loops, but the soundness property above is not about termination, it's about constant progress, which you also want in embedded systems to ensure they never need reboot.

Now that you know what a type checker is and how to implement one in Dafny, perhaps you will feel much better prepared to model and experiment on your new programming language, like recently the [Cedar team did](https://github.com/cedar-policy/cedar-spec)?

This is the end of the blog post. I hope you enjoyed it!

---

## Bonus: more advanced modeling
If you are looking for some advanced concepts, feel free to continue reading! Beware, math ahead!

Sometimes, modeling the evaluator and the type-checker as functions is not enough. One wants to model them as relations, and determine some properties about these relations, such as the order of evaluation being irrelevant for the final result.

> In the rest of this blog post, largely inspired by the book "Types and Programming Languages", Chapter 8, written by Benjamin Pierce, I will illustrate one element of the proof: the one that inductive and constructive versions of the set of Terms are equivalent. Having equivalence enables obtaining other results out of the scope of this blog post, including that the order of evaluation does not matter.

Reviewer 2: is there a reason why Terms is in caps? You mention "set of all terms" with small t in the next few lines.

> In the rest of this blog post, largely inspired by the book "Types and Programming Languages", Chapter 8, written by Benjamin Pierce, I will illustrate one element of the proof: the one that inductive and constructive versions of the set of Terms are equivalent. Having equivalence enables obtaining other results out of the scope of this blog post, including that the order of evaluation does not matter.

Author: yes, that was in reference to the `datatype Term`, but as it's in the rest of the blog post, it's less relevant here so I accept your suggestion.

With the help of this trick, it becomes possible to prove similar equivalences for different inductive and constructive definitions of:
- The set of `(Expr, Expr)` of small-step evaluations
- The set of `(Expr, Type)` of type checking

but I leave these as an exercise for the interested reader.

In Types and Programming Languages, chapter 3.2, we discover that there are two other mathematical definitions of the "set of all terms".

> The first one in definition 3.2.1 states that the set of _terms_ is the smallest set 𝒯 such that:

Reviewer 2: In the smallest set definition, you use two different cursive Ts. (I did notice when copying the T in text it appears as 𝒯, and different in math)

3. if $$t_1 \in 𝒯$$, $$\;\; t_2 \in 𝒯$$ and $$t_3 \in 𝒯$$, then $$\texttt{if}\;t_1\;\texttt{then}\;t_2\;\texttt{else}\;t_3 \in 𝒯$$.

Note that these terms omit `Double` and `Add` above. This means we cannot state that this set is the same as `set t: Term | true` as one would like to write, but let's continue.

We can write the inductive definition above in Dafny too:

{% highlight javascript %}
ghost const AllTermsInductively: iset<Term>

ghost predicate InductionCriteria(terms: iset<Term>) {
  && True in terms && False in terms && Zero in terms
  && (forall t1 <- terms :: Succ(t1) in terms)
  && (forall t1 <- terms :: Pred(t1) in terms)
  && (forall t1 <- terms :: IsZero(t1) in terms)
  && (forall t1 <- terms, t2 <- terms, t3 <- terms
        :: If(t1, t2, t3) in terms)
}
lemma {:axiom} InductiveAxioms()
  ensures InductionCriteria(AllTermsInductively)
  ensures forall setOfTerms: iset<Term> | InductionCriteria(setOfTerms)
            :: AllTermsInductively <= setOfTerms
{% endhighlight %}

The second definition for the set of all terms in section 3.2.3 is done constructively. We first define a set $$S_i$$ for each natural number $$i$$, as follows

$$S_0 = ∅ $$;  

> $$\begin{aligned}S_{i+1} = && && \{\texttt{true}, \texttt{false}, 0\} \\ && \bigcup && \{\texttt{succ}\;t_1, \texttt{pred}\;t_1, \texttt{is_zero}\;t_1 \mid t_1 \in S_i \} \\ && \bigcup && \{\texttt{if}\;t_1\;\texttt{then}\;t_2\;\texttt{else}\;t_3\mid t_1 \in S_i,\; t_2 \in S_i,\; t_3 \in S_i\}\end{aligned}$$.

Reviewer 2: In a few para below, "The second definition for the set of all terms in section 3.2.3...", there is a ' . ' after the 2nd union, but not anywhere else. 
I do see you already have had a discussion about it.

> $$\begin{aligned}S_{i+1} = && && \{\texttt{true}, \texttt{false}, 0\} \\ && \bigcup && \{\texttt{succ}\;t_1, \texttt{pred}\;t_1, \texttt{is_zero}\;t_1 \mid t_1 \in S_i \} \\ && \bigcup && \{\texttt{if}\;t_1\;\texttt{then}\;t_2\;\texttt{else}\;t_3\mid t_1 \in S_i,\; t_2 \in S_i,\; t_3 \in S_i\}\end{aligned}$$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$$\begin{aligned}S_{i+1} = && && \{\texttt{true}, \texttt{false}, 0\} \\ && \bigcup && \{\texttt{succ}\;t_1, \texttt{pred}\;t_1, \texttt{is_zero}\;t_1 \mid t_1 \in S_i \} \\ && \bigcup && \{\texttt{if}\;t_1\;\texttt{then}\;t_2\;\texttt{else}\;t_3\mid t_1 \in S_i,\; t_2 \in S_i,\; t_3 \in S_i\}\end{aligned}$$
```

Author: I will keep this point because it was written in the textbook like that (and a semicolon after the first equation)

2. Second, for any set `someset` satisfying the induction criteria, for every `i`, we prove by induction that *every set of terms `S(i)` is inside `someset`*.
3. `AllTermsConstructively` being the *union* of all these `S(i)`, it is also contained
in any set satisfying the induction criteria, including `AllTermsInductively` which is the smallest one, so `AllTermsConstructively <= AllTermsInductively`
4. From 1. and 3. we obtain `AllTermsConstructively == AllTermsInductively`.

Let's prove it in Dafny!

## 0. Intermediate sets are cumulative

First, we want to show that, for every `i <= j`, we have `S(i) <= S(j)` (set inclusion). We do this in two steps: first, we show this cumulative effect between two consecutive sets, and then
between any two sets.

We use the annotation `{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}` which makes Dafny verify each assertion independently, which, in this example, helps the verifier. Yes, [helping the verifier](https://dafny.org/dafny/DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-verification-debugging-slow) is something we must occasionally do in Dafny.

> To futher control the situation, we use the annotation `{:induction false}` to ensure Dafny does not try to prove induction hypotheses by itself, which gives us control over the proof. Otherwise, Dafny can both automate the proof a lot (which is great!) and sometimes time out because automation is stuck (which is less great!). I left assertions in the code so that not only Dafny, but you too can understand the proof.

Reviewer 2: "To futher control ..." - > "To further control ..."

> To futher control the situation, we use the annotation `{:induction false}` to ensure Dafny does not try to prove induction hypotheses by itself, which gives us control over the proof. Otherwise, Dafny can both automate the proof a lot (which is great!) and sometimes time out because automation is stuck (which is less great!). I left assertions in the code so that not only Dafny, but you too can understand the proof.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To further control the situation, we use the annotation `{:induction false}` to ensure Dafny does not try to prove induction hypotheses by itself, which gives us control over the proof. Otherwise, Dafny can both automate the proof a lot (which is great!) and sometimes time out because automation is stuck (which is less great!). I left assertions in the code so that not only Dafny, but you too can understand the proof.
```

{% highlight javascript %}
// 3.2.6.b.1 AllTermsConstructively is a subset of any set satisfying the induction criteria (hence AllTermsConstructively <= AllTermsInductively)
lemma AllTermsConstructivelyIncludedInSetsSatisfyingInductionCriteria(
  terms: iset<Term>
)
  requires InductionCriteria(terms)
  ensures AllTermsConstructively <= terms
{
  forall i: nat ensures S(i) <= terms {
    InductionCriteriaHasConcreteIAsSubset(i, terms);
  }
}

lemma AllTermsConstructivelyIncludedInAllTermsInductively()
  ensures AllTermsConstructively <= AllTermsInductively
{
  InductiveAxioms();
  AllTermsConstructivelyIncludedInSetsSatisfyingInductionCriteria(AllTermsInductively);
}
{% endhighlight %}

## 4. Conclusion with the equality

Because we have `<=` and `>=` between these two sets, we can now prove equality.

{% highlight javascript %}
lemma InductionAndConcreteAreTheSame()
  ensures AllTermsConstructively == AllTermsInductively
{
  InductiveAxioms();
  AllTermsConstructivelySatisfiesInductionCriteria();
  AllTermsConstructivelyIncludedInAllTermsInductively();
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Bonus Conclusion

> We were able to put together two definitions for infinite sets, and prove that these sets were equivalents.

Reviewer 2: "equivalents" -> "equivalent" ? (not sure if you meant it to be that way)

> We were able to put together two definitions for infinite sets, and prove that these sets were equivalents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We were able to put together two definitions for infinite sets, and prove that these sets were equivalent.
```
(not sure if you meant it to be that way)

As stated in the introduction, having multiple definitions of a single infinite set makes it possible to pick the definition adequate to the job to prove other results. For example,

> - If a term is in the constructive set, then it cannot be `Add` for example, because it would need to be in a `S(i)` and none of the `S(i)` define `Add`. This can be illustrated in Dafny with the following lemma:

Reviewer 2: "If a term is in the constructive set, then it cannot be Add " -> "If a term is in the constructive set, then it cannot use/(or something similar) Add "

> - If a term is in the constructive set, then it cannot be `Add` for example, because it would need to be in a `S(i)` and none of the `S(i)` define `Add`. This can be illustrated in Dafny with the following lemma:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If a term is in the constructive set, then it cannot use/(or something similar) `Add` for example, because it would need to be in a `S(i)` and none of the `S(i)` define `Add`. This can be illustrated in Dafny with the following lemma:
```

Author: ```suggestion
- If a term is in the constructive set, then it cannot be constructed with `Add` for example, because it would need to be in a `S(i)` and none of the `S(i)` define `Add`. This can be illustrated in Dafny with the following lemma:
```

  requires t in AllTermsInductively
  ensures Succ(t) in AllTermsInductively
{
  InductiveAxioms();
}
{% endhighlight %}

This could be useful for a rewriter or an optimizer to ensure the elements it writes are in the same set.

Everything said, everything above can be a bit overweight for regular Dafny users.
In practice, you're better off writing the inductive predicate explicitly as a function rather than an infinite set with a predicate, so that you get both inductive and constructive axioms that enable you to prove something similar to the two results above.

{% highlight javascript %}
predicate IsAdmissible(t: Term) {
  match t {
    case True => true
    case False => true
    case Zero => true
    case Succ(v) => IsAdmissible(v)
    case Pred(v) => IsAdmissible(v)
    case IsZero(v) => IsAdmissible(v)
    case If(c, t, e) => IsAdmissible(c) && IsAdmissible(t) && IsAdmissible(e)
    case _ => false
  }
}
lemma {:induction false} CannotBeAdd2(t: Term)
  requires IsAdmissible(t)
  ensures !t.Add?
{
}
lemma {:induction false} SuccIsInInductiveSet2(t: Term)
  requires IsAdmissible(t)
  ensures IsAdmissible(Succ(t))
{
}
{% endhighlight %}

> This above illustrates what Dafny does best: it automates all the hard work under the hood

Reviewer 2: "This above illustrates" -> "The above example illustrates" or something similar

> This above illustrates what Dafny does best: it automates all the hard work under the hood

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This above example illustrates what Dafny does best: it automates all the hard work under the hood
```

> so that you can focus on what is the most interesting to you, and even better, it ensures you don't need to define `{:axiom}` yourself in this case.

Reviewer 2: "can focus on what is the most interesting to you"

> so that you can focus on what is the most interesting to you, and even better, it ensures you don't need to define `{:axiom}` yourself in this case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
so that you can focus on what is most interesting to you, and even better, it ensures you don't need to define `{:axiom}` yourself in this case.
```

> I hope you give Dafny a try and to see you soon posting [interesting questions](https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/discussions)!

Reviewer 2: "I hope you give Dafny a try and to see you soon posting [interesting questions](https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/discussions)!" -> "I hope you give Dafny a try and looking forward to your [interesting questions](https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/discussions)!" maybe or similar.

> I hope you give Dafny a try and to see you soon posting [interesting questions](https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/discussions)!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I hope you give Dafny a try and looking forward to your [interesting questions](https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/discussions)!
```
